Hi.
Um, there's no class today,
But there is class.
I think there's still five minutes left, right?
Oh, it's six 30. Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
Good evening, sir.
Good evening, sir. We are unable to hear you.
Sir, uh, good evening, sir.
Before we start the class, uh, there is no quiz, uh,
for the last two sessions
and the link notes are also not there
for last two sessions.
Last two session. Yeah, sir.
Okay. Are you able to here?
Yes, yes, yes. Now we can. Yes, sir. Now we're
Able to. Okay, but
I'm getting a echo back.
Uh, let me reconnect.
Hmm. Hello? Still the, the, I'm getting echo.
I will re-log in.
Hello? Hello?
Yes sir. Now you can hear me?
Yes sir. We can hear you. Okay, fine.
Yes sir. Okay, so there is NOCO for me.
Now let just rename,
okay, so, um,
someone said there was two quizzes.
Last two quizzes. You're not able to attend
No link for the last, uh, Sunday
You did not get link.
Yeah, so we just not there.
Others? Everybody got link? No,
Sir. We also,
Last week, uh, there was no link sir,
Even for the class notes.
Also, there was no link.
We submitted it in the previous week class. Uh,
So last two quizzes has not been there. There no link.
1 1 1 Quiz last week
The present, a summary link notes, sir.
Okay. Okay.
I will just write a mail right now,
otherwise I'll forget last week.
Is that
Please? As well as the
summary notes, sir?
Okay. Last two.
It was, uh, fourth February and seventh February, sir.
Fourth February.
Okay.
Okay. I have sent mail now.
Okay, so today's, uh, this is the,
uh, second pla,
I mean this witness day.
Next, next day is the next is going to be the last class.
Okay? This Saturday there is no class
because the course content I have finished.
Whatever I'm doing is for, uh,
for just giving you practical knowledge.
Yeah, sure. So for this session, we need to submit notes.
Uh, this
On this session. Ah, yeah.
Notes and, uh,
quiz content will be there for this session.
Yes. Okay. So this is the last session
for your quiz and notes.
Last, uh, class, I mean the next witness day class is going
to be just overall what is the thing
that I had taught in the, that's it.
Okay. Yes.
Yes. So today is the last
for your technical perspective.
Yes, sure sir. Thank you.
Okay. So this is how
large language models have been trained
by reinforcement learning.
Okay? So you have been already going through lot
of things in the environment action.
That is your agent is taking action.
He is changing state to state. What does it mean?
Last two pluses and all I have been telling you this is a
good, uh, pictorial explanation.
So this, I think about the situation.
LLM training has three phases, okay?
First one is called pre-training stage that is done
by transformer model.
Second one is called supervised fine tuning.
Third one is called reward model training. Okay?
After that, the fourth,
so all these are called training phase, okay?
That is pre-training supervised, fine tuning,
and then reward model training.
After that, the LLM gets into post-training phase,
and post-training phase is required for aligning the wards
that has been generated by all of these
training phase, okay?
And reinforcement learning is going
to be used in the post-training phase.
Why it is coming in the post-training phase.
The reason is pre-training models are trained.
What a very large corpus of data.
You can train it over English dictionary,
you can train it over any novel stories written
by famous English authors like Wordsworth,
uh, Milton, and all, many, many novels are there
by which you can train in large language model,
but that will be a good model for training.
The next word alone,
I thought predicting the next ward alone, okay?
You ask any, uh, next word to be predicted, you'll predict
by getting that next word, you go
and ask another next word,
you'll put another next door like that.
If that is the case by which you are forming a sentence,
the sentence will not be a good sentence.
That can make a sense to the human being. Okay?
So for making a sentence that makes a sense
to the human being will required alignment.
That alignment is done by reinforcement learning. Okay?
So for reinforcement learning,
what we required will require a environment.
Environment is consisting of your state,
next state under what action, your transition to next date
and reward that you get in the next step.
Like that you are going to do so many state
to state transition, and agent is the person
who is living in the environment.
He is, he is whose objective is to
maximize the total expected reward that you optin
after taking a whole set
of transaction, set of transition.
Okay? So that is where these LLM models, um, they
actually, reinforcement learning has been invented in
19, late fifties.
Okay? But it has not been finding any good, uh, use case
apart from robotics.
When OpenAI, they started coming up with, uh,
training reinforcement learning for doing the alignment of,
uh, the sentence construction.
That is the biggest, uh, contribution from OpenAI
to make this use case of reinforcement learning.
No other company had thought of doing that. Okay?
So what they said is basically every word is predicted
by the pre-training model.
Every word is giving rise
to your new new states.
So you start from my initial word
that is initial word is basically your S zero state.
You predict this first word that is
S one, your state is now.
So the initial word plus your first prediction,
this becomes your S zero S one that becomes your state.
Now, okay, so your state is now it can see two words.
After that you are giving the last word that you have seen
to the model pretend model.
It'll give you the second. That is third ward. Okay?
So now you have seen three words
that becomes your state number call is three.
So like that. If you allowed to
construct total capital T number of words
for making a sentence, the length
of the sentence is called capital T.
So you are transitioning from state zero two
capital ST, okay?
This many states you are transitioning wherein in every
state you have seen those many previous wards.
Let's say you are in a state of S four,
that means you have seen four previous wards.
Okay? So like that,
it goes on four means you can start from S one index at S
one, S two, S3, S four, okay?
Then at the state of S four,
if you are predicting the fifth, third,
the moment you predict the fifth word
by using the preterm model, now you transition
to S five state.
Okay? So like that every state you're transitioning
by the help of predicting new wards.
That becomes your new state definition.
Now, now in that situation,
what are the next word that you're predicting so
that you can make it a meaningful sentence
that is the objective here.
So for that you have to construct the whole sentence
and then you give the sentence to the reward model.
Reward model is a predefined model
which has a human preference of scoring for a sentence.
So every sentence you generated,
you will get a reward score,
which will give zero to one value.
Take that score, then you back propagate the reward
to your initial state, okay?
Then you have a estimate of the each
and every state that you have gone through, okay?
That becomes your value function,
value function for each and every state.
Okay? Once you have,
uh, got your value function ready, then what do you do?
Then you go for finding
a improved policy.
So that a policy means at a given state
what action you can take.
Okay? What action means? What is the word that predicting?
Once you have estimate of a value function, then you can
predict a better word,
which will be better than higher than the average value
that you are predicting and the state.
So that becomes your after model
and by the help of your reward model, when you
estimate the value function for each
and every state, that becomes your critic model.
So you have actor and critic, this two model
by which you can go and train it, okay?
That is the basic principle.
After this actor critic model, then
whatever I have said, it is said over here, okay?
This is your trajectory. So
after act model,
this P-P-O-P-P-O is basically a advanced level
of act critic model, okay?
In which they modifies the gradient of the update.
Okay? We'll see that now.
So this is your trajectory.
Trajectory means you're constructing a whole sentence
starting from S one to a capital T.
At every state you have take an action.
As a result you have got a reward.
So this, this one is standing for your,
you are able to see my screen, right?
This one is standing for your yes sir, yes sir.
State and action pair in the times step of one.
Next you take a action, you go to next time step. Next time.
Step means you are basically predicting
the word at the times.
Step two, like that,
totally final T time statements.
Your sentence length is capital T. Okay?
Now, you may have a situation
that all the sentence will not be of equal.
Then in that case, you set a upper limit value
of the sentence length,
and if any sentence is falling short
of the upper limit value, you pad them from the ending side.
You are doing a padding, okay?
And if any sentence longer than upper you truncate, then
these are the jobs that you have to perform.
So this is what I have said to you, your actor model is pi.
PI is the actor model to predict your action given state
at the state of ST plus one,
at each state, ST plus one, you have a transition.
This transition probability is not known to you,
neither not known to me, nor the models.
They, they cannot, even though they're working good,
but they will not be able to tell this correctly.
So this is your probability of the trajectory.
This is a multiplication of all
of your individual conditional probability.
This you have already seen in the theory election.
This is called your reward for the whole trajectory,
and this is called a discounted reward
gamma multiplied by ti.
What is the objective for every reinforcement learning?
That is to maximize the
expected discounted reward.
So this, you have to maximize, and
whenever you are maximizing, you go
for a new projectile for that.
What is the reward you are getting? Okay, take that reward.
Then again, you go find another tri tile.
TRI is your confident one sentence.
Take that reward like that.
If you are predicting many sentence, you have many,
many rewards, sum them up.
Divide them by the total number of sentence
that you have predicted.
That is called averaging out. Okay?
Averaging out is written by this prob representation
in the continuous domain.
This is for discrete domain, okay?
In discrete domain you have submission.
In contrast, you have integration,
okay?
And your value function is what?
Value function is what is the average
expected sum of discounted reward for you
to live in a particular state call is okay?
Action value function is QS, comma,
which you already know advantages difference between them.
Advantage says that what is the advantage for me
to pick up this particular action?
A okay, so difference between this Swiss scholar advantage.
Now this is what is the use case
of reinforcement learning in LLM.
So you have a LLM,
which is representative of your policy.
You have a prompt. The prompt is basically your
initial state, okay?
Then for every initial state,
you start your state condition.
From the initial state, you are going
to take a action at every state, okay?
The action becomes your output token.
By this time, you know already tokenization, right?
You are not going to represent word as a
simple English word, okay?
It is represented by a vector that is called token.
So at every state you take action,
that means you're predicting it.
Output token. As a result of that,
you're changing your new state.
That new state is here.
The response that you generate from a L,
that is called prompt and output,
Okay?
So after you have generated your prompt
and output, that becomes your new state.
Again, on the new state, you take one more action, you go
to another state, okay?
So at every output that you're predicting,
you have a reward model to verify
how good is your prediction.
Okay? So we are going to maintain one L, LM
for generating your next word, another L, LM for
verifying your how good is the state.
That is called reward model, okay?
And in between there is another model.
It's called supervised fine tuning.
Basically supervise fine tuning is going to be working
as the policy model.
Okay? You,
you can see this now, this is at every time step.
What goes into the prompt
and what comes out as a prediction.
So you will give a single word the,
it'll give you a response
dog, okay?
Suppose you are giving a prompt
to any particular pre pretend model.
You give a single word
or you may give multiple word also, okay?
For both of the case, the process remains same.
They take that it as a prompt.
That LLM will take it as a prompt
and then it'll generate one single token.
That token will not be displayed to you, right?
Uh, after prediction of the prediction
by the LLM model itself, that word will be taken by the LLM
to form a new state so that it can predict the next token.
Then again, it'll be taken by the LLM to predict the new uh,
state, and then it'll take one more action like that.
It'll complete the whole sentence. Okay?
And that is go going on.
Finally, the output would be shown to you like this.
So what are the processes going through?
Like this mechanism, initial state, you have a policy, LLM,
initial state, you have policy LLM,
which will produce a next word.
This next word will be, uh,
the next word will basically your action as a result of
that you transition to next date.
That next date will be intrinsically taken up
by the model again to predict the next action like that.
It'll go on and for every word
that it is basically predicting for which it is sending it
to a reward model.
And reward model is returning the reward for every tokens
that it is predicting.
So you have a trajectory for that.
This project is first word, the state
of the first word, then the prediction.
That is a one. Then you have a reward system like that.
For every word it is having this called projector.
Okay? Now policy gradient, things are all coming up.
So the moment you get part token basis reward,
which may not be applicable for all the cases, okay?
Normally they get that reward only
after completion of a sentence
and then they'll back propagate it by the effect
of gamma factor to every state.
So they have enough part token reward,
which is basically back propagation.
It is not back prop. It is basically
called diminishing value.
It is not back prop, I'm sorry.
It is a diminishing value which is coming to be available
to every state now
after which they can run the policy gradient.
Now, in case of policy gradient
for every kind of gradient
and all this is the main objective, you have
to maximize your expected sum of discounted reward.
This one for doing that, how to find out the gradient.
This gradient is again giving up this formula. Okay?
So expectation of sum of word for all the words iCal
to small T zero two, capital T means for all the words,
you are going to take this quantity called gradient
of log property of A given S multiplied
by rau.
Okay? Now you have, you can decompose this rau by
sum over gamma to the power T multiplied
by individual reward.
That is rt.
This RT individual reward is here,
this individual reward, okay?
You can make that decomposition also at time.
T, what is that reward? You can make that decomposition of.
So that actually boils down to here,
which I have already shown.
Okay? So this is basically the gradient
of your objective function, which is this part.
The second part, this is a policy gradient, okay?
Now here you look at, this is called reward to go.
You are to goins. Suppose you,
you're in the state called cap small T, you are in the
small T times step.
Currently you're living at now you can take capital
T number of times, steps.
So basically how many times steps you can go forward.
It is capital T minus a small T.
That many times steps you can go forward.
So for every timestamp you take an you have a
reward that you can get.
So that is called reward to go.
There's a future reward basically
to goman is future reward, okay?
All of this has, see I I just told you, there's R towel.
You can replace by some for every
intermediate state that you are getting reward, okay?
This is a plain reward.
You can multiply this gamma power of I,
which will become your discounted reward.
Okay? Now in the activity model,
there is a famous thing called baseline subtraction.
So instead of calculating the rau like this, which is going
to be a positive factor, so a positive factor multiplied
by lock prob of this thing,
which will be some fraction, okay?
So ultimately you're going
to get all the time positive values, okay?
Uh, and actually we are going to
maximize the uh, expected sum of discounted reward.
So for that, we will take basically negative term of this.
So negative log probability.
Basically prob is tell less than one.
So log off less than one is basically negative thing.
That negative you multiply in the front.
If you keep a negative, that will become a positive thing.
Okay? So that positive thing is the outcome
that I was talking about.
Instead of thinking of a positive value coming multiplier
as a multiplier, you can take this difference
that this is called the average of the state value.
That is value function.
Basically, if you subtract this, then sometimes
this individual reward
that may be less than the average value.
So in that case, this will become negative.
Sometimes it'll be higher than the average.
In that case, this difference will be positive.
So ultimately this submission,
this will not be multiplied all the time
with a positive quantity.
It'll sometime multiplied by negative quantity also.
So that will make your job easier in order to find this
gradient in a better manner.
Okay? All of this has been covered to you.
So you see that these are the things you have already known.
All of this, the HAI is basically
what the HAI is basically your reward at the time of tea.
This HAI can be one of the following.
So there are six possible things
that you can think about Shai,
if you take just some of all the reward,
that is a very simple thing.
That is total reward.
You can multiply that, uh, with a gumma factor
that will become discounted reward.
You can replace this shy
by subtraction from a baseline value.
Baseline means it'll basically aboriginal,
you can replace this high width
your Q functionals, okay?
You can replace this high width advantage
functionals, okay?
And you can have this TD error term. TD error term.
Let you see that TD rat term is the sixth one.
Sixth one is a TD rat term, okay?
TDR means you are trying to estimate the value for you
to live in a particular state called ST.
For that you are having a TD term that
by which you are replacing this term site, okay?
TD determines you take one transition, you go
to next step called ST plus one,
you will be having a value function available for it,
plus the reward that you obtain
for the instantaneous reward.
Subtract that from your current estimate
of the value function so you can have that also.
Okay? So PPO algorithm
for all of these six variation of this thing,
this is not PPO, this is normal policy gradient, okay?
If you go for advantage estimate function, okay?
You are going to be into act critic model.
If you go for TDR, still you're into act critic model.
We are not into PPO model till now
for getting into PPO model.
They'll make modification here, not in the other term.
There are two terms that is getting multiplied.
One is the gradient of lock priority.
Other one is the reward obtained at the, for the whole
so modification that you can make in the reward function,
which is six possible ways.
They're not P-P-O-P-P-O makes modification here itself
the gradient of law, property action given S.
Okay? So that is where now we are getting into PPO.
So PPO talks about something called you go for a
policy iteration in that you have a previous policy
and you have a current policy.
Your current, uh, this PPU algorithm enforces
that your current policy should not be, I mean,
whenever you're updating your old policy,
you get an current policy while updating, you should not go
beyond a particular boundary.
That is what is the enforcement done by PPO. Okay?
So that is the basic philosophical PPO for doing that.
They have a proposition.
Proposition is take the ratio between the current policy
and the old policy and multiply
by the advantage function, okay?
And that ratio should not be going beyond
if value called if silent
and IT ratio also should not be falling
behind the value called F1 minus fal.
So again, repeat this ratio should not be going
beyond one plus fal,
and it should not be going down below one minus fal.
So it'll be lying between one minus fal
and one plus safe salon, okay?
That is the one of the surrogate objective function
of PPO, okay?
And before PPO, there was something called TRPO.
Before PPO came up. TRPO was the precursor of PPOT.
TRPO had the similar thing.
Only thing is instead of enforcing
by value called one plus asylum
or one minus asylum, they're enforcing it by the help
of kale divergence.
Okay? They're saying that the kale divergence
between the old policy and the current policy should be
less than equal to delta,
and this data value will be between some zero and one.
Okay? So this ratio will not go
beyond some particular value.
That is the conclusion of ppo. It's coming up over here.
So this is the surrogate objective of our PPO.
This is called ratio between the whole policy
and current policy, which is multiplied by the advantage.
Now the rogate objective is given here,
which last class I had always said.
Now also I had repeated, okay, the ratio that is rt,
it is the first factor is called unclip objective.
This is unclipped objective.
And then this one, the second
argument is called clipped objective clipping.
Why? You are clipping RT between one minus F silent
and one plus F silent.
Okay? So this is called clipped up objective
between clipped objective
and object, whoever is minimum, you are taking that value.
Again, that is the objective function
that trying to optimize.
So this is called policy loss. This is not the critic loss.
I mean there are two things.
One is actor loss, other one policy, uh,
other was value loss.
Okay? Actor, critic. So this is used for actor model,
not for the critic model.
This is the graphical meaning of that loss function going
beyond on plus IL to truncate it to on plus, that's it.
If the loss function is falling below,
then one minus fal, then you truncate it, okay?
So look at your loss function. Value is falling down.
Falling down here is one is falling down.
Here is one minus fal.
If you allow, it'll fall down, it'll fall down here.
This allowing of falling down is
not allowed.
The falling down is prevented from here.
So now your loss function will become horizontal
after it has gone below one minus it become horizontal.
Okay? Similar thing here,
also loss function going up, going up, fine.
The moment it, it is crossing one plus silent,
then you should not consider these
values of the higher values.
You should consider the flat value that it'll never go
beyond one palace, one plus,
Okay?
So this is basically your,
This is the loss
for your reward model calculation.
So again, I'll tell you one thing we are going to give,
we are going to generate some response from the LLM.
That response is given to the reward model.
That how good is my prediction?
Okay? So whenever you are giving it to the reward model,
they apply something called this cost function
that is the raw reward for x
and Y pair X is your query, Y is your response, okay?
The raw reward for that,
which is coming from your reward model minus
you are taking a divergence between
the word pre the prediction that is Y given S for your LLM
with respect to a frozen LLM, this reference LLM, okay?
By reference it's called frozen, LLM.
So frozen LM means you are having a pre-trained, uh, uh,
jet GPT version that you can make it
to be a for deference model.
So your prediction should not be diverging too much from the
frozen LLM, okay?
So that divergence is measured by kale divergence.
You take the divergence value, multiply with the beta
and take the difference between your
raw reward coming from a reward model
and the divergence between your model and ference model.
So this is called the loss function for your reward.
Again, with this, also you need to make a training.
So this loss function will be used for making your
estimation of your value function,
because how good is my prediction?
So that's called value function.
For every state we are having a value function
that will be used for our desk,
Okay?
As I saw, I, I have shown actor critic model the plane
models in the Cardpool environment wherein we have actor
network, critic network, we are computing loss
for the actor, network loss for the critic network.
Okay? So this is what is a loss for your critic net network.
This part, let me show you bigger form.
This you are going to use for loss function
of your critic network, okay?
And what is a loss function for your policy network?
That is your actor model.
That is this one, this one clipped.
Okay? So we have these two losses that we'll be using.
This is the advantage. So look at here.
Now these are your token prediction,
which is coming from your actor model.
Fine, for every token that will predict,
you can give it to your critic model.
That will evaluate how good is your
part token prediction by the help of this loss function,
this loss function, okay?
So this is a very, very broad overview that I'm giving.
I have not been, I have not got time
to show you the same thing in my Google collab.
Okay? So when you
look at here, part token basis,
whatever prediction is there, you give it to your,
your model of hello model.
They will find out what, how good is your prediction?
You have to take them. Then along
with your loss function coming up from your actor
model, combine them.
That will be useful for your total loss function. Okay?
So that is what it's called, critic training. Yeah.
Okay. So overall the
pseudo code is given here.
Okay? I will tell you what is happening.
Let me show you from my Google call app this.
Yeah, I, I have made, uh, this coding
using TRL library.
TRL was a taught reinforcement learning.
I have used TRL library.
The problem for TRL is
that I'm using the PPO library from
this thing experimental PPO.
Okay? So I'll just do this,
try trying this.
The problem is this TRL library that I'm using,
it is under the experimental mode to work
with PPO and GRPO.
And there I'm facing some trouble.
However, I'll show you the overall structure.
So look at this PPO config
and PPO functions that I'm going to use it.
I'm taking it from tl experimental ppo.
How many participants are there today?
Uh, T 8 38 out
of 80.
This is a very vital thing. Those are missing.
They're missing, okay?
So look at here I have compiled it is showing
a warning message, that experimental warning,
you were importing TRL experimental.
API here are unstable and may change
or be removed without any notice,
and that is why I ran this code three months back.
It worked fine, but some of the API got changed in between.
So there, because this not experimental mode, okay,
silence this warning and all.
So it, they're saying this very understanding,
they're updating, so it make change anytime.
Okay? So PPO config,
this will make your config that what is the learning rate?
You are using batch size, mini batch size and all. Okay?
Then you have this, this is from hugging face.
So I have to give a grant access
from hugging face, and this TRL is from torch,
not from hugging face, but this data
set is from hugging face.
Um, you loading this dataset.
So I have a dataset
whose columns are prompt query and all.
Then I have this PPO dataset query.
I'm going to give this many queries ary format.
This is the model name that I'm using for my policy model.
So I'm going to use the token iser padding token.
So this token I'm using from hugging face auto to organizer.
Okay? So this is after doing the definition of token is
now, which dataset on which you are going
to apply the token is that is what is done over here.
This is the dataset I'm using in this dataset.
I'm going to apply this whole function of tokenize, okay?
So applying any function on a dataset, we have
to take the help of map function.
Map will allow you to take a function to be applied
on a particular dataset.
It's a very big dataset, and batching is false.
So when I'm making this
tokenization function, what I'm doing,
I'm tokenizing this sample.
Query means sample is becoming part sample.
Part sample means one sentence, okay?
One sentence I'm taking from the set of sentence,
which is there in my dataset variable.
From there, I'm taking one sentence
because it is dataset as well, collection of many sentence.
So I'm applying map function on
every sentence by sentence.
So here I do this sample query means this sample is
basically it to be representing this data set.
Now, under which I have a query, this is a sentence now,
and on that sentence I'm going to apply token organizer.
This token organizer is coming from auto token organizer.
Let me run this. These are all ready made
available code for this.
I don't have, I have copied from, uh, Google, uh,
help from from Google and all.
Okay? You can also do it.
After that, you can decode any token,
all the things you already know.
This is the second, um, sentence,
second sentence inside my dataset.
What is my dataset?
This is PPO dataset dictionary.
This PPO dataset dictionary.
The second is you can also type this third,
get what happens if you fire canonball?
Pumpkin high speed.
Yeah, this is the thing. I have it now.
Data set this,
okay?
Now here we have policy model, reference model.
This is frozen model, policy model, sustainable model.
This is frozen model. Then we have a value model.
Value model is going to be used for critic purpose.
Then we have a reward model. Okay?
So reward model is going to give you the reward
for a particular sentence that you're predicting.
By using that reward, you have to compute a value function
for every token basis.
That is why we have two different model here, okay?
Sometimes somebody may get
confused, why do I need value model?
Why do I need reward model? Okay?
And it is defined in this manner.
So we have to use this automo, uh, automo.
These are from hugging face causal, lm, LLM,
from the pre pretend model, this model name is G PT two.
We are using GPT two
and then we have this, we are mapping it to device map.
You guys ma going to GPU or CPU, okay?
But this is your policy model.
Then once you make this causal LLM,
then you can call this function.
These are all coming from, these are
not, I have not done anything.
You give this base policy model that have created here
to the value head.
They will create a policy model out of this.
Similarly, they are going to
make a reference model, do the same thing.
Now, these two are the same architecture,
but different instance.
That means their weight might be different.
You have hello model.
This value model is this one model
for sequence classification.
Now, if you look at this is your reward, uh, token is
to be used in your reward model.
Now, this is your PPO trainer.
So there are some thing got changed here,
which I'm struggling.
It is saying it has no, this function has, this
function has no attribute called generation confi.
The generation confi is basically
this PPO trainer.
Here, there is a error, as I told you, this is a
unstable function of TRL we are using, so experimental, TRL.
So once we do that,
after that we are going to
train it for training purpose.
This is the main loop. Then the program ends, okay?
For training purpose.
So OKE means how many episodes you want
to consider in one episode.
Basically, you are having one sentence to be generated.
Okay? So here, uh, you're now inside a episode,
you are going over the batch.
So you have a batch for input id.
So, uh, again, you might get a question here that
what is this input id?
This input ID is basically
whenever you are, uh, collecting all
of your dataset into batch.
So the, this is a, um, uh,
dictionary item in which there is input id, which stands
for the part token basis.
What is the vector for the part token basis?
If you have a sentence of capital T length, you're going
to have the length of the input.
I is going to be T cross DI mean the dimension
of this input is going to be this, this part, this part.
Now t cross, basically you have t number of tokens
for each token you have D dimension, okay?
That is your quad tenor.
You use this quad tensor to be fed
inside your PPO trainer.
Do model, do policy dot generate, okay?
PPO trainer is basically
what PO trainer is going to be defined here.
PPO trainer takes this configuration as a model. Okay?
So this is the model under which
this is pointing to policy model.
There is a reference model,
which is policy pointing to reference model.
There is a reward model, which is pointing
to reward model like that, okay?
We're now referring to model here.
This model is a policy model. So go back to policy model.
You have a policy model over here. This one policy.
In this policy model, you are going
to have a generate function.
So that generate function, we are going
to be invoking from here
that generate function.
We are going to be invoking from here
to generate a response for the query.
Okay? Then this response is told in a batch.
Again, then for your
query and batch, you are clubbing them up in the G function
to make your query plus response.
That means you conquering your query and response.
You get a whole sentence. Now that is a text.
Then you send this text to your reward token organizer
to make the reward tokenization possible.
After that, you send it to your reward model.
What you are sending, you are sending your query plus
response
that you are sending to reward model.
That reward model is generating a reward
for the response that you have generated.
Then that response
that we're getting is a reward value here.
That reward value, you have to give it to PPO trainer.
This PPO trainer, this is the job of the TRL library,
which I'm not doing anything.
I'm following this PPO trainer, which will accept your,
what is your query, what is your response,
and what is the reward that you have got for this response?
By using that, they will train the PPO. Okay?
I, I have separate program for finding out
what is PPO doing by using, uh, just simple,
which I'm not showing you over here for the a LM purpose,
I have shown you this PPO 10 for your I think,
card pole game, right?
So the, this is the basic block of operation.
So you generate your,
you get your query from your input itself.
Give that query to your policy model
to generate the response.
Then you form this conquer ation of query and response.
That is a whole sentence. That whole sentence you do.
A reward token is for your reward model
because every model has its own token is okay,
the token remains same.
Only thing that tokens are different.
So for that token is output will be different.
After that, you are using reward model to get the reward
for the prediction that you have made.
Okay? That reward is stored here in reward output,
which reward output.
You are now splitting them across all
of your input wards.
That's part token basis.
You get splitted up this reward, okay?
Then you call this PPO trainer. Okay?
This program, I had done it two, three months back
to working fine because they're changing
the function parameters.
I had to fix the program here.
Okay, I'll do that time later.
So have you got the basic overview of this LLM training?
Yep, sir. Uh, one question.
Um, if we have any of our, uh, language, like in the thermal
or Canada or anything, would it be possible for us to train,
uh, uh, an LLM or will?
Would it be possible to create an LLLM based on out of this?
Uh, yes. You have to make the tokenization for every
language, indigenous language.
You have to make the tokenization after that.
Mm. After that,
I don't think any more changes required.
So, so once we create a organization, um, meaning, um,
uh, yeah, once it is done, how, how would it be saved
and how would be retrieved if we have to use any,
any application based out of this LLM?
Okay, so token IN is basically,
suppose you have 50,000 words in your book
vocabulary for each of the word.
You are going to have let's say 1 28 dimensional vector
that how to make it.
That is a job of token.
I, once you have it, then you store it inside, just like
that hugging face and all they are having token
auto token organizer thing, right?
It is basically a large dictionary.
That dictionary, you only need to store it.
So again, there are many techniques since
50,000 word, each word is of 128 dimension
and one dimension means I'm just,
you can consider it is a 16 beat pa.
Okay? 16 beat means one
float element.
One float element.
If want to store, if you take 16 beat 128 element,
it'll text 16, multiply a hundred, that much storage,
and again, for 50,000, wat very large storage,
that much storage, they're going
to make it in a hierarchical manner.
All these auto organizer under what they do it,
they don't store all the 50,000 words vector form in a
single place of storage.
They have a, like you have paging mechanism.
They have paging mechanism like in case of books,
you see pages, right?
You can subdivide all of your memory requirement
to various different, different storage.
Each storage is going to make some kind of limited storage,
which are going to make a interlinking between them.
All of them are part of the tokenization thing.
Only that is a change required.
Apart from that, No, I don't think anymore changes required.
Okay, Why still we don't have any, uh, LLM based out
of Hindi or something, or do we have it already?
There are company, there are like, uh, server,
I think, so m AI is one thing I think recently
Launched, I guess, Yeah, server AI is doing, is it for
that they're claiming,
but I have not seen success story out of that.
Yeah. Claiming India AI mission is there
for which they have funded many good companies to do that.
I think, uh, take Mahindra is the front runner in that
is another front runner like that.
The problem here is in the case of our
languages in India, we have not only
rev, the connectivity between the words
is heavily influenced by many other factors.
Those factors are part of the like, uh,
Uh, You can consider these are like we have,
so now we have bean ano, then we have,
Um, uh,
You know, and all,
there are many grammatical foundation things
because of which Indian language is quite defined from
European language or English,
Okay? There
are many hurdles of that
because of which, uh, they're not able to train it so hard.
This belongs to the domain of linguistic, uh, people, those
who can solve those problem.
Till now, there is no success story
for Indian language models.
Mm-hmm. Okay?
Even though you can make some something, um,
Single language, generation of language, I mean generation
of sentence of sentence,
but translation from Indian language
to English language is going to very, very difficult,
daunting task because the way we speak, okay?
If you look at any children when he's learning, uh,
when he is learning English language, okay, he speaks as if
just translating word by word
for his mother tongue, okay?
And, uh, let's say, uh,
we emphasize the subject too much.
Subject means the place we want to go,
the person who is speaking.
So we put the subject in the beginning of the sentence.
I will give you one example. I asked a, uh,
new learn of English from India.
From India that do you want to go
to school today?
He will answer in his, uh,
suppose I'm speaking Hindi.
Then he will say
when he want to speak in English, he will say,
uh, not going school
today like that.
Hmm. So the way we speak is we give a lot
of emphasis on the subject in the beginning,
the first words are composed of subject.
Uh, second means, not second, fourth, or word on
or in a sentence are going to be of lesser priority,
but in case of English, it is not like that.
So this translation job is going to be very daunting task.
I I'm not asking from a translation perspective.
I'm, I'm talking from the exact language
perspective. Yeah. Generation
Purpose for generation purpose, the job is easier.
Translation job is harder.
Even within English, also within English
through French translation.
Also, translation job is very harder,
but the generation job is easier than translation.
And also one more question.
Let's, let's assume that we are,
we are not using any um, LLM.
We have some, some projects
where the text generation is required.
Um, so let's say for example, if it is in the medical field
where we have a lot of, uh, medical data
and um, we are training a model to, to understand, uh,
let's say, let's take an example of, uh, x-ray of your lungs
or ex or maybe some scan report of your heart.
If it, if you are telling a model to train
and understand to, to see
that if any new patients are coming,
if they have some trouble, uh, instead
of getting the values in, in, in the DML
or in medical terms, can we have it in the human
readable language model?
So can we train a model to, to provide such things
or in that case, LLM is required.
Uh, any kind of diagnosis purpose, they require
basic image processing as a first step
to verify at which particular position there is some kind
of, uh, abnormal development.
Okay? So after that they when identify
and locate the particular place where some kind of anomaly
or abnormal things has happened, then they go
for verification with the existing
reports in terms of language.
Okay? So suppose you have got
to see that this is a place where there are some kind
of a abnormal development out there.
Then you go and crosscheck with that particular
diagnosis of what are the existing reports
for those abnormal development.
Now in that case, you again, first you check with all the
image level difference between your diagnosis
and uh, already ground truth available
for those particular abnormality.
After that, you go and fetch the language level description.
Mm-hmm. So after that, when
you see your things are
somewhat different than the existing round truth,
then you can just go
and refer the to what extent some
of the existing reports are matching.
You are going to have the similar word appearing for you,
but you will not be able to, uh, say
that what is the exact difference which requires a medical
doctor's intervention.
However, you can only say point out locally localization
that these are the exact places of abnormalities
that I can see, but the mapping of that particular normal
to a particular existing preexisting report application
that may not be successfully done.
Got it. Thank you, sir. Okay.
Okay. Okay. So we can quit the meeting today.
We are going to have next week Wednesday again, not,
we are not meeting in the Saturday.
Okay? Yeah, sure, sir.
Thank, Okay. Yes sir. Thank you, sir.
Yeah, thank you sir.